= Health Monitor 
Monitor individual aspects of your rails application's health





Most rails applications have many additional moving parts of which the health cannot be assessed with 
simply pinging the (hopefully page cached) homepage 

For example, 
* Is Email is sent successfully?
* Is the SMS gateway alive and you bought sufficient credits?
* All database connections are alive? Backgroundrb down again?
* The cloud computing setup jacked the imagemagick? Again?
* You are running out of disk space and there are no more file descriptors for your
* The git SHA and version is what ?

Health Monitor adds a single controller action to generate an html, js, or xml report with details of *all* 
your custom defined health checks. An error response code (500 server error) indicates failure
when any monitored feature fails or exceeds the custom timeout definition. Health monitor is easier to setup than
custom server side cron tasks and adds the advantage of exercising more code since everything from your load balancer 
to nginx to mongrels must be happily shoving rubies around to get that 200 oh boy success message.
So ping away, grab a beer and know that hey, you might be too drunk but at least you will know your application 
is sick before your clients do.

== Installation
Install the plugin or gem
  script/plugin install git://github.com/blythedunham/health_monitor

  sudo gem install health_monitor --source=http://gemcutter.org

Run the generator to create HealthMonitorController
  script/generate health_monitor


== Quick Reference
  # Built in checks to monitor db and schema
  monitor_health  :schema_check, :database_check

  # Monitor a process
  monitor_process :monit

  montior_health :mycheck, :description => 'Check blahs' do |controller|
    ... do something ....
  end



=== Examples

  class HealthMonitorController < ApplicationController
    acts_as_health_monitor

    # Built in checks query the database for the schema and make sure
    # that the database connection
    monitor_health :schema_check, :database_check, :ey_agent_check

    #monitor specified process
    monitor_process :monit

    # check database connection by ensuring there is at least one user
    # calls protected method +user_check+
    monitor_health :user_check, :description => 'Check database connection'

    # Monitor email sending. Fail if it exceeds 4 minutes
    monitor_health :email,
      :timeout => 240000 # Fail this test if it exceeds 4 minutes
      :method => lambda{ |controller|  ActionMailer::Base.deliver_my_mail('blah') }

    # Display the results of system df call with the results
    monitor_health :check_disk, :description => 'Check Disk status' do |controller|
      results = `df`
      status = $? == 0 ? :success : :failure
      { :status => status, :message => "DF: #{results}" }
    end

    protected
    def user_check; User.first; end

  end

=== +monitor_process+ Monitor a server process
+process_name+ - name of the process to monitor

==== Options
+sudo+ - (default false) set to true to run pgrep as sudo
+pattern+ - specify a pattern to match (pgrep -f) instead of the process_name
+arguments+ - additional arguments to pgrep "-o root,blah -a"

    monitor_process :monit, :someproc, :sudo => true
    monitor_process :mongod, :pattern => 'mongodb.*slave'


=== +monitor_health+
Monitor the health of the application

==== Options
<tt>:description</tt> - description of the task
<tt>:message</tt> - Defaults to SUCCESS or FAILED!
  Additional information that is either a string or a hash with keys <tt>:success</tt> and <tt>:failure</tt>
  Message allows more custom result information, such as the number of servers queried or IP address
  or git version.

<tt>:timeout</tt> - Fails the health check if the total time exceeds <tt>:timeout</tt> milliseconds
<tt>:method</tt> - The name of the method or a Proc to invoke. A block can be given as well.
Defaults to the method with the feature name


=== Built in checks
+schema_check+ and +database_check+ are protected methods.

Check the database connection and report the schema number
    monitor_health :schema_check

Check for an active database connection
    monitor_health :database_check

=== Monitored Methods
The proc or method defined should return its status as one of the following:
* true or false indicating success or failure
  monitor_health :mymonitor, :method => { |controller| ...do something ... ; true }

  monitor_health :myothermonitor
  def myothermonitor; false; end

* a status symbol: of <tt>:success</tt>, <tt>:failure</tt>, <tt>:timeout</tt>, <tt>:skipped</tt>
  monitor_health :mymonitor, :method => { |controller| ...do something ... ; :failure }

* a hash of attributes including:
** <tt>:status</tt> must be a value listed above: defaults to failure
** <tt>:message</tt> Custom message with result data
** <tt>:description</tt> The task description

  monitor_health :mymonitor do |controller|
    ...do something ... ;
    { :status => :success, :message => 'My custom results for server abc', :description => 'task description' }
  end

=== Skip tests or run a single test
To skip a test, add the skip parameter to your url with a list of comma delimited tests to skip
  http://yayhost/health_monitor.html?skip=testblah
  http://yayhost/health_monitor.js?skip=test1,test2

To specify tests to run, use the :only parameter
  http://yayhost/health_monitor?only=test2,test4,test5
   
=== Routes
By default, the route resources are added (assume controller is named +HealthMonitorController+)
The action defined is named +monitor_health+

Base resource if show is not already defined by +health_monitor_url+
  host/health_monitor.js?skip=mysql

Member accessor +monitor_health_health_monitor+
  host/health_monitor/monitor_health.js?only=thatone,thisone

To disable and write your own routes, use +route+ option with +acts_as_health_monitor+
  acts_as_health_monitor :route => false

=== Considerations
If you are reporting sensitive information, consider limiting this controller to specific IP addresses or 
adding authorization logic to your controller with before_filters.

=== Inspirations and Fun
Health monitor was inspired by work at http://spongecell.com. 
Health monitor is brought to you by the rule of threes and the letter B.
The official mascot of health monitor is GIRAFFE! and the official drink is sparklemotion (1 part sparks, 1 part champagne)

Copyright (c) 2009 Blythe Dunham. See LICENSE for details.
